DISCLAIMER: PRINTED COPIES ARE FOR REFERENCE ONLY. PLEASE REFER TO THE ELECTRONIC COPY FOR THE LATEST VERSION.
SYSTEMS S-015
MEDICAL AUDIT COMMITTEE ON TRAUMA
Date: 7/1/2018 Page 1 of 3

I. PURPOSE

A. To establish an advisory committee to the local Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Agency to
monitor, evaluate, and report on the quality of trauma medical care.
B. To promote Countywide standardization of the quality improvement process with emphasis on
the educational aspect.
C. To review issues and matters of a system-wide nature. It shall not be the function of this
committee to become directly involved in the disciplinary action of any specific individual.
Authority for disciplinary action rests with the County of San Diego EMS (CoSD EMS)
Medical Director and/or the State EMS Authority in accordance with Section 1797.204 of
Division 2.5 of the Health and Safety Code.
II. AUTHORITY: Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, Sections 1797.204 and 1798; and
Evidence Code, Sections 1040 and 1157.7.

III. POLICY
A. The scope of the committee shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Review of trauma deaths in the County
2. Evaluation of trauma care
3. Provision of input to the local EMS agency in the development, implementation, and
evaluation of medical audit criteria for trauma patients
4. Designing and monitoring of corrective action plans for trauma medical care
5. Assistance with and participation in research projects
6. Recommendation of process improvement strategies related to trauma care
B. Membership
The committee shall be comprised of the following:
1. Members:
a. County staff (ex officio)
b. County Medical Examiner or designee
San Diego County Emergency Medical Services Office
Policy / Procedure / Protocol
MEDICAL AUDIT COMMITTEE ON TRAUMA 7/1/2018
Policy: S-015 Page 2 of 3
DISCLAIMER: PRINTED COPIES ARE FOR REFERENCE ONLY. PLEASE REFER TO THE ELECTRONIC COPY FOR THE LATEST VERSION.
c. Trauma Center Medical Directors from all designated Trauma Centers
d. Trauma Program Managers from all designated Trauma Centers
e. Base Hospital Physician representing the Prehospital Audit Committee (PAC)
f. Neurosurgeon appointed by the Academy of Neurosurgeons
g. Anesthesiologist appointed by the Anesthesia Association
h. Orthopedic Surgeon
i. Emergency Physician not affiliated with a trauma center, appointed by San Diego
Emergency Physicians Society
2. Ad Hoc Members (non-voting) that may participate:
a. Physicians enrolled in trauma and EMS/Disaster fellowships
b. Assistant Trauma Medical Directors
C. Attendance
1. Members should notify CoSD EMS staff in advance of any scheduled meeting they would
be unable to attend. Attendance at these meetings for the Trauma Medical Directors and
Trauma Nurse Coordinators, or their designees, is mandatory. If an absence is necessary,
a designee may be appointed to attend.
2. Resignations from the committee shall be submitted in writing to CoSD EMS.
3. Invitees may participate in the medical review of specified cases where their expertise is
requested. All requests for invitees must be approved by CoSD EMS in advance of the
scheduled meeting.
4. Invitees not participating in the medical review of specified cases must be approved by
CoSD EMS and the committee chair and co-chair.
D. Election of Officers
 Committee officers shall consist of one chair and one co-chair; the chair shall be a
Trauma Medical Director and co-chair shall be a Trauma Program Manager. Elections
will take place during the last meeting every other calendar year (odd years) and
appointees shall assume office at the first meeting of the new calendar year. Officers
elected shall serve a two year term and may be re-elected.
E. Voting
Due to the "advisory" nature of the committee, many issues require consensus rather
than a vote process. Vote process issues will be identified as such by the Chairperson.
When voting is required, a simple majority of the voting members of the committee
need to be present. Members may not participate in voting when a conflict of interest
exists. 
San Diego County Emergency Medical Services Office
Policy / Procedure / Protocol
MEDICAL AUDIT COMMITTEE ON TRAUMA 7/1/2018
Policy: S-015 Page 3 of 3
DISCLAIMER: PRINTED COPIES ARE FOR REFERENCE ONLY. PLEASE REFER TO THE ELECTRONIC COPY FOR THE LATEST VERSION.
F. Meetings
The committee shall meet on a monthly basis or at a frequency as determined
appropriate by the committee, but always at least 10 times a year.
G. Committee Documentation
Minutes will be kept by CoSD EMS staff and distributed to the members at each
meeting. Due to the confidentiality of the committee, confidential committee documents
will be collected by CoSD EMS staff at the close of each meeting, and no copies may
be made or possessed by members of the committee. All official correspondence
and communication generated by the MAC will be approved by CoSD EMS staff and
sent on San Diego County letterhead.
H. Confidentiality
1. All proceedings, documents, and discussions of this committee are confidential and
pursuant to Sections 1040, 1157.5, and 1157.7 of the California Evidence Code. The
prohibition relating to the discovery of testimony provided to the committee shall be
applicable to all proceedings and records this committee which is one established by a local
government agency as a professional standards review organization which is organized in
a manner that makes available professional competence to monitor, evaluate, and report on
the necessity, quality, and level of specialty health services including, but not limited to,
prehospital care services. Guests may be invited to discuss specific cases and issues in
order to assist the committee in making final case or issue determinations. Guests may only
be present for the portion of the meeting about which they have been requested to review.
2. All members shall sign a confidentiality agreement not to divulge or discuss information that
would have been obtained solely through committee membership. Prior to the invited guests
participating in the meeting, the Chairperson or designee is responsible for explaining and
obtaining a signed confidentiality agreement for invited guest(s)

