# EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY POLICY NUMBER 758 A Division of the Merced County Department of Public Health SUBJECT: ADULT TREATMENT PROTOCOLS – TXA / BLEEDING CONTROL Effective Date 04/2024 Authority: Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, and California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 9, Chapter 4, 1797.220 Initial Date: 07/2019 Review Date: 04/2026 PAGE 1 of 2 Signatures on File Approved By: Tim Williams Ajinder Singh, MD EMS Administrator EMS Medical Director STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE I. DEFINITION Tranexamic Acid (TXA) is a synthetic amino acid (lysine) that blocks plasminogen from being converted to the enzyme plasmin. Plasmin works to break down already-formed blood clots in the human body by attacking and breaking down fibrin destroying clots in a process known as fibrinolysis. TXA must be given less than 3 hours after the initial injury. II. INDICATIONS Any trauma patient ≥ 15 years of age with an injury < 3 hours and Systolic BP < 90 mmHg at any point (100 mmHg for 65 years or older), who is at high risk for ongoing internal/external hemorrhage which may include: • Bleeding that is not controlled by direct pressure, hemostatic agents, or tourniquet. • Multisystem trauma patients with associated spinal or head injury may receive TXA. • Severe post-partum hemorrhage • Patients with HR ≥ 120 with signs and symptoms of severe hemorrhage may receive TXA with Base Hospital Physician order III. CONTRAIDICATIONS • Injuries > 3 hours old. • Patients < 15 years of age. • Hypersensitivity to the drug. • Isolated traumatic brain injury (TBI) • Isolated spinal shock • Traumatic Arrest with CPR greater than 5 minutes without ROSC • History of Thromboembolic event (CVA / TIA, MI, DVT, or PE) within the past 24 hours. • Drowning or hanging victims • Isolated extremity hemorrhage when bleeding has been controlled by tourniquet • If there is a strong expectation of re-implantation IV. BLS TREATMENT OXYGEN As appropriate, goal to maintain SpO2 at least 94%, assist ventilations as necessary. Subject: ADULT TREATMENT PROTOCOLS - TXA / BLEEDING CONTROL Policy Number 758 Page 2 of 2 STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE VITALS Assess vital signs. BLEEDING Stop active bleeding with direct pressure, hemostatic dressings, or if CONTROL necessary, apply a tourniquet. TEMPERATURE Assess temperature and keep patient warm to prevent hypothermia. V. ALS TREATMENT MONITOR Treat rhythm as appropriate. VASCULAR ACCESS Establish two (2) large bore IVs; and only administer fluid bolus if systolic blood pressure is less than 90 mmHg. If unable to obtain IVs in an extremist patient, obtain IO access. CAPNOGRAPHY Utilize wave form capnography. PREPARATION Infuse 1000 mg of TXA in 250 mL of 0.9% Normal Saline and utilize 10 gtts/mL tubing. TRANEXAMIC Administer 1000 mg IV/IO over 10 minutes (drip rate of 4 gtts/second) – DO ACID (TXA) NOT ADMINISTER IV/IO PUSH. Assess vitals; every 5 minutes after TXA administration. TRANSPORT Notify receiving hospital of TXA administration. VI. SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS Document mechanism of injury (blunt, penetrating, GSW, etc.), the time injury/incident occurred, the indications for use and time TXA was administered.



---