# EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY POLICY NUMBER 433 A Division of the Merced County Department of Public Health SUBJECT: DRUG AND SOLUTION STANDARDS Effective Date 07/2024 Authority: California Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, Sections 1797.220 and 1798(a) Initial Date: 12/2020 Review Date: 07/2026 PAGE 1 of 2 Signatures on File Approved By: Tim Williams Ajinder Singh, MD EMS Administrator EMS Medical Director STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE I. PURPOSE To establish consistent minimum Drug and Solution inventory standards for Basic Life Support, Advanced Life Support, ALS First Responders, and Special Event units or vehicles within Merced County. II. POLICY Authorized EMS providers in Merced County, including special event units or vehicles, shall maintain a Drug and Solution inventory of all items within these standards established by the Merced County EMS Agency. III. PROCEDURE A. The provider agency shall ensure that each authorized drug and solution inventory is maintained and stored consistent with Federal, State and Local EMS Policy. B. Drug and solution inventory, which have been used, broken, near their expiration shall be replaced as soon as possible. C. Drug and solution inventories shall be checked (inventoried) each day. This shall include stored inventories not currently in use (must comply with Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) regulations). D. Any deficiencies of the drug and solution inventory shall require that the ALS units be removedfrom service until the deficiencies are corrected. E. A complete drug and solution inventory (except IV solutions) shall accompanythe patient in the transporting vehicle. F. Annual and random inspections by EMS Agency personnel will be made to verify that ALS units are maintained in compliance with requirements. Subject: DRUG AND SOLUTION STANDARDS Policy Number 433 Page 2 of 2 STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE IV. DRUG AND SOLUTION INVENTORY The chart below lists the required medications and the minimum amount carried. Ambulance providers may choose to carry an amount above the minimum (e.g. rural providers). It must also be noted that the strength/size of medication carried may become variable due to the availability of the medication. Description Strength/Size (Recommended) BLS Ambulance ALS Ambulance ALS First Responder BLS Special Event 1 Adenosine 6 mg/2 ml 5 5 2 Albuterol Sulfate 2.5 mg/3 cc 4 2 3 Amiodarone 150 mg/3 ml 3 or 450 mg 3 or 450 mg 4 Aspirin 81 mg 20 20 20 20 5 Atropine Sulfate 1 mg/10 ml 3 3 8 mg/20 ml 1 1 6 Calcium Chloride 10% 1 gm/10 ml 2 1 7 Dextrose 25 gm 2 2 8 Diphenhydramine 50 mg/1 ml 2 2 Children’s chewable 1 box 1 box 1 box 9 Epinephrine 1:1,000 1 mg/1 ml 2 2 1:10,000 1 mg/10 ml 4 4 Epi Auto-injector/ Epi Kit 1 1 10 Fentanyl 100 mcg 2 2 11 Glucagon 1 Unit of Medication 1 1 1 ml of Diluting Solution 2 12 Ketamine 500 mg vial 1 1 13 Ketorolac 30 mg/ml 2 1 14 Lidocaine 100 mg preload 6 6 15 Magnesium Sulfate 50% 5 gm/10 ml 1 1 16 Midazolam 5mg 2 2 17 Morphine 10 mg 2 2 18 Narcan 2 mg 2 Preloads 2 2 2 Preloads 19 Nitroglycerine 0.4 mg Tablets (1 bottle of 25) Tablets (1 bottle of 25) 20 Nitropaste 1-3 gm 1 1 21 Normal Saline 10 ml 3 3 250 ml 2 1 1000 ml 3 3 22 Oral Glucose 15 gm 1 1 1 1 23 Sodium Bicarbonate 44.6 - 50 mEq/50 ml 2 2 24 Tranexamic Acid 1 1 25 Tylenol 1 gm /100 ml 1 1 26 Zofran (Ondansetron) 2 mg/ml or ODT tablet 4 or 4 mg 4 or 4 mg 4 or 4 mg NOTE: ALS Providers can either carry Amiodarone or Lidocaine. ALS Providers do not need to carry both Amiodarone and Lidocaine.

Policy Number 433 (Drug and Solution Standards) with all inventory requirements has now been appended in full to your 400 series EMS policy section. Each protocol series remains clearly separated and organized as requested.


---