# EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY POLICY NUMBER 720 A Division of the Merced County Department of Public Health SUBJECT: ADULT TREATMENT PROTOCOLS - SEPSIS Effective Date 07/2023 Authority: Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, and California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 9, Chapter 4, 1797.220 Initial Date: 09/2018 Review Date: 07/2025 PAGE 1 of 2 Signatures on File Approved By: Tim Williams Ajinder Singh, MD EMS Administrator EMS Medical Director STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE I. DEFINITION Sepsis is the body's overwhelming and life-threatening response to infection. In Sepsis, when an infection occurs at any potential site in the body, the immune system's inflammatory response can be overwhelmed leading to SIRS (Systemic Inflammatory Response Syndrome) which causes tissue damage that can lead to organ dysfunction, organ failure and death. Risk factors include - Age, current cancer treatment, diabetes, immune compromise, alcoholism, IV drug abuse, malnutrition, recent surgery (5 days or less), indwelling medical devices (Foley, IV access devices, etc.) and renal disease. Glucose greater than 140 mg/dl in non-diabetic patients may be a sign of sepsis. EtCO2 readings of 25mmHg or less are suggestive of acidosis/poor organ perfusion. Remember to look for signs and symptoms of possible infection - (ALOC, weakness, dizziness, abdominal pain, frequent urination, near syncope, diarrhea, SOB, persistent cough, etc.) Systemic Inflammatory Response (SIRS Criteria) - Look for signs of infection or known/documented infection; if present or suspected assess for signs of Systemic Inflammatory Response (SIRS Criteria), 2 or more SIRS Criteria = sepsis alert. Sirs Criteria • Temperature = 100.4 or greater or 96.0 or less • Respiratory Rate = 20 or greater • Heart Rate = 90 or greater II. BLS TREATMENT OXYGEN As appropriate, goal to maintain SpO2 at least 94%. Assist ventilations as necessary. VITALS Assess vitals signs. BLOOD SUGAR Test blood glucose. If blood glucose is greater than 140 mg/dl in a nondiabetic patient, it may be a sign of sepsis. TEMPERATURE Assess temperature - 100.4 or greater or 96.0 or less suggests potential sepsis. Subject: ADULT TREATMENT PROTOCOLS - SEPSIS Policy Number 720 Page 2 of 2 STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE III. ALS TREATMENT MONITOR Treat rhythm as appropriate. CAPNOGRAPHY Utilize waveform capnography; EtCO2 readings of 25mmHg or less are suggestive of acidosis/poor organ perfusion. IV/IO ACCESS Start IV fluid therapy reassess for signs of fluid overload after every 500ml until max infusion of 30ml/kg. If SBP is less than 90mmHg start two (2) large bore IV/IO’s and give fluids until 30ml/kg has been infused. BASE CONTACT Notify receiving facility and Base Hospital of Sepsis Alert as soon as possible. PUSH DOSE If patient maintains SBP less than 90mmHg after 30 ml/kg of fluid given, EPINEHRINE continue fluid and administer, 10mcg slow IV push of push dose epinephrine (10mcg/ml) very 1-5 minutes until SBP is GREATER than 90mmHg. IV. SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS AND PRIORITIES USE EXTREME CAUTION WHEN USING PUSH DOSE EPINEPHERINE PUSH DOSE EPINEPHRINE SOLUTION MIXING INSTRUCTIONS • Take Epinephrine 1:10,000 concentration (1 mg/10 ml) and waste 9 ml of Epinephrine • In same syringe draw 9 ml of saline from the patient’s IV bag and shake well • Mixture now provides 10 ml of Epinephrine at 10mcg/ml (0.01 mg/ml) concentration • Label syringe Epinephrine 10 mcg/ml



---