# EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY POLICY NUMBER 710 A Division of the Merced County Department of Public Health SUBJECT: ADULT TREATMENT PROTOCOLS RETURN OF SPONTANEOUS CIRCULATION (ROSC) Effective Date 04/2024 Authority: Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, and California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 9, Chapter 4, 1797.220 Initial Date: 07/2022 Review Date: 04/2026 PAGE 1 of 2 Signatures on File Approved By: Tim Williams Ajinder Singh, MD EMS Administrator EMS Medical Director STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE I. DEFINITION Return of Spontaneous Circulation (ROSC) after sudden cardiac arrest from a non-traumatic event. These patients need to be evaluated for potential STEMI event and transported to the appropriate facility if the patient’s condition allows. Any patient who achieves ROSC needs time to stabilize for approximately 5 minutes, as most patients will re-arrest during that time frame. Take time to prepare for transportation, assess the patient, and perform a 12-Lead ECG for proper patient destination. If ROSC patient was defibrillated at any time and systolic BP is 80 mmHg or greater, transport patient to a STEMI Receiving Center. II. BLS TREATMENT OXYGEN As appropriate, goal to maintain SpO2 at least 94%, assist ventilations as necessary. VITALS Assess vital signs. BLOOD SUGAR For patients who have ALOC, test blood glucose and if less than 60 mg/dl, CHECK treat per EMS Policy \#724 Adult Treatment Protocols - Altered Level of Conscious (ALOC) – Syncope III. ALS TREATMENT MONITOR If the 12-Lead ECG reads STEMI or Acute MI or an equivalent; transmit the 12-Lead ECG to appropriate STEMI Receiving Center. VASCULAR ACCESS IV/IO rate as appropriate, if patient has a systolic BP < 90 mmHg administer 250 ml fluid boluses to systolic BP > 90 mmHg. Reassess patient after each bolus assessing for signs of fluid overload. ROSC If patient loses ROSC begin CPR and treat the patient per EMS Policy \#702 Adult Treatment Protocols - Cardiac Arrest. Subject: ADULT TREATMENT PROTOCOLS RETURN OF SPONTANEOUS CIRCULATION (ROSC) Policy Number 710 Page 2 of 2 STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE IV. SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS IF THE PATIENTS CONDITION DOES NOT IMPROVE CONSIDER USING PUSH DOSE EPINEPHERINE – 10 mcg (1ml) slow IV/IO push every 1-5 minutes for systolic BP less than 90 mmHg and patient is not responding to previous treatment. PUSH DOSE EPINEPHERINE SOLUTION MIXING INSTRUCTIONS • Epinephrine 1:10,000 concentration (1 mg/10 ml) and waste 9 ml of Epinephrine • In same syringe draw 9 ml of normal saline and shake well • Mixture provides 10 ml of Epinephrine at 10 mcg/ml (0.01 mg/ml) concentration • Label syringe Epinephrine 10 mcg/ml



---