# EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY POLICY NUMBER 460 A Division of the Merced County Department of Public Health SUBJECT: PREHOSPITAL RENDEZVOUS Effective Date 05/2025 Authority: California Administrative Code, Title 22, Division 9, Chapter 2 Initial Date: 02/2018 Review Date: 05/2028 PAGE 1 of 2 Signatures on File Approved By: Tim Williams Ajinder Singh, MD EMS Administrator EMS Medical Director STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE I. PURPOSE The purpose of this policy is to define when to appropriately rendezvous when caring for a prehospital patient. II. POLICY Rendezvous with an ALS unit or first responders can be an effective method of delivering care to critically ill or injured patients; however, travel time or patient destination make it impractical in some situations. The following protocol should be utilized by EMS personnel when considering a rendezvous. III. PROCEDURE A. WHEN TO CONSIDER A RENDEZVOUS 1. Anytime the patient has suffered a cardiac arrest and transport time to the hospital exceeds 10 minutes. 2. Anytime the patient is critically ill, and the transport time is prolonged (greater than 20 minutes) and in your judgment a Paramedic would be of assistance. 3. Additional staff may be necessary for the care of a patient (i.e., first responder). B. WHEN NOT TO CONSIDER A RENDEZVOUS 1. When total transport time is 10 minutes or less to the hospital. 2. When it becomes apparent that the location of the rendezvous will be within ten (10) minutes of the hospital. C. HOW TO RENDEZVOUS 1. Contact the ambulance dispatch center as soon as possible to request a rendezvous. If possible, make the request while preparing the patient for transport as opposed to waiting until you are already transporting. 2. The transporting unit should not wait at the scene for a rendezvous. Subject: PREHOSPITAL RENDEZVOUS Policy Number 460 Page 2 of 2 STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE 3. The transporting unit should not wait at the agreed site of a rendezvous if you have a critical patient. If the vehicle you are rendezvousing with is not there, proceed to the hospital Code 3 (red lights/siren). 4. Allow the ambulance dispatch center to coordinate the rendezvous, or briefly communicate directly with each rendezvousing unit. 5. When the rendezvous occurs, the Paramedics, with their equipment, should join the patient in the back of the ambulance already transporting the patient. There should be no more than a one (1) to two (2) minute delay in total rendezvous time. Good pre-rendezvous communications through the ambulance dispatch center is essential as it allows the Paramedics to prepare the proper equipment for transfer into the transporting unit. In other words, the Paramedics should not stop at the roadside to treat the patient unless: a. The patient is in full cardiac arrest. b. There is specific base hospital direction to stop at the roadside and treat the patient. 6. This policy was implemented to assist BLS personnel in the difficult decision of when to consider an ALS prehospital rendezvous.



---