# EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY POLICY NUMBER 734 A Division of the Merced County Department of Public Health SUBJECT: ADULT TREATMENT PROTOCOLS - HYPOTHERMIA Effective Date 10/2024 Authority: Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, and California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 9, Chapter 4, 1797.220 Initial Date: 10/2011 Review Date: 10/2026 PAGE 1 of 2 Signatures on File Approved By: Tim Williams Ajinder Singh, MD EMS Administrator EMS Medical Director STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE I. DEFINITION LOW BODY TEMPERATURE - 90°F OR LESS MILD 90°F (32° C) to 95° F (35° C) - Shivering, complaint of cold, usually conscious, ALOC, clumsiness, normal blood pressure, or cyanosis. MODERATE 82°F (28° C) to 90°F (32° C) - Confusion, semiconscious, combative, shivering ceases, muscle rigidity, dilated pupils, decreased breathing rate, blood pressure difficult to obtain, V-fib with agitation/sudden movement (handle/move patient gently). SEVERE 82°F (28° C) OR LOWER - Comatose, no rigidity (flaccid), apnea, spontaneous V-fib, the severely hypothermic patient may appear to be clinically dead. Pulse and respirations may need to be checked for longer periods before beginning CPR (up to 60 seconds). Bradycardia is not responsive to Atropine and is dependent upon rewarming. II. BLS TREATMENT OXYGEN As appropriate. Keep SpO2 at least 94%, assist ventilations as necessary. VITALS Assess vital signs and check for pulse up to 60 seconds. TEMPERATURE Assess temperature. BLOOD SUGAR Test blood glucose, if less than 60 mg/dl refer to EMS Policy \#724 Adult CHECK Treatment Protocols – Altered Loss of Consciousness (ALOC) or Syncope. WARMING Remove wet clothing. If the patient requires movement, be gentle. Avoid MEASURES unnecessary movement or rubbing. Cover patient with blanket to prevent heat loss, keep patient horizontal. Initiate CPR as needed. Subject: ADULT TREATMENT PROTOCOLS - HYPOTHERMIA Policy Number 734 Page 2 of 2 STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE III. ALS TREATMENT MONITOR Treat rhythm as appropriate. If patient is pulseless/apneic initiate CPR. Limit defibrillation of V-fib/V-tach to one shock. Once the temperature is GREATER THAN 86° F (30° C) defibrillate V-fib/V-tach as necessary. VASCULAR ACCESS Administer warm IV fluid bolus in 250 ml increments and reassess patient frequently. Most severely hypothermic patients are volume depleted. Withhold IV medication until the temperature is GREATER THAN 86° F (30° C). BLOOD SUGAR Test blood glucose, if less than 60 mg/dl refer to EMS Policy \#724 Adult CHECK Treatment Protocols – Altered Loss of Consciousness (ALOC) or Syncope.



---