# EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY POLICY NUMBER 742 A Division of the Merced County Department of Public Health SUBJECT: ADULT TREATMENT PROTOCOLS – BEHAVIORAL EMERGENCY Effective Date 04/2024 Authority: Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, and California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 9, Chapter 4, 1797.220 Initial Date: 11/2018 Review Date: 04/2026 PAGE 1 of 3 Signatures on File Approved By: Tim Williams Ajinder Singh, MD EMS Administrator EMS Medical Director STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE I. DEFINITION Most patients are non-violent, requiring only supportive care and transport. Responder and patient safety are paramount, especially when treating an aggressive or violent patient. Restraints are to be used only to prevent injury and assure the safety of the patient and responders. EMS personnel shall make every effort to preserve the patient’s health, safety, and preserve their dignity, rights, and wellbeing. If the patient is overly aggressive when EMS personnel arrive on scene, they shall withdraw to a safe location and request law enforcement. EMS personnel shall not approach or attempt to remove a violent patient from the scene without law enforcement present. In a known violent situation, EMS personnel should stand by until the scene is secured by law enforcement. II. BLS TREATMENT SCENE SAFETY Assess for immediate danger. Protect yourself and others. Summon law enforcement if needed. RESTRAINTS Apply as needed; assure restraints do not compromise respirations, circulation, and neurological function. Reassess and document distal circulation, sensation, and movement status every 15 minutes. OXYGEN As appropriate, goal to maintain SpO2 at least 94%, assist ventilations as necessary. VITALS Assess vital signs. BLOOD SUGAR Test glucose and treat as appropriate. CHECK III. ALS TREATMENT VASCULAR ACCESS IV/IO TKO MIDAZOLAM Administer 2 mg IV/IO push initially. Titrate 1 mg increments as needed to a maximum dose of 5 mg. Administer 5 mg IN or IM if necessary; may repeat Subject: ADULT TREATMENT PROTOCOLS – BEHAVIORAL EMERGENCY Policy Number 742 Page 2 of 3 STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE once after 10 minutes if necessary. IV. SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS A. Methods or other materials applied in a manner that could cause respiratory, vascular, or neurological compromise, including prone restraints shall not be used. Restraints (hand cuffs) applied by law enforcement require the officer’s continued presence to ensure patient and prehospital personnel safety. The officer should accompany the patient in the ambulance or follow the ambulance to the hospital. B. Assess the situation for evidence of immediate danger. 1. Protect yourself and others. 2. Summon law enforcement if needed. 3. Show of force utilizing law enforcement should be considered if indicated by patient behavior and if necessary to render care. 4. Assess and treat life-threatening injuries. 5. Additional assessment and treatment as the situation permits. C. ONE EMS PERSONNEL should be responsible for assessing, treating, and communicating with the patient. Multiple personnel attempting to intervene may increase patient’s confusion and agitation. 1. Speak in a calm, quiet voice. Use caution when approaching and caring for a patient. 2. Approach the patient in a direct, honest manner. 3. The SAME EMS PERSONNEL who rendered care at the scene should remain with patient during transport. D. Obtain and record pertinent medical history if possible. 1. Prescription or non-prescription drugs. 2. Underlying organic causes, i.e., brain tumor, hypoglycemia, hypoxia. 3. Previous psychiatric problems. 4. Agitation may be a sign of hypoglycemia, hypoxia. Subject: ADULT TREATMENT PROTOCOLS – BEHAVIORAL EMERGENCY Policy Number 742 Page 3 of 3 STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE E. Physical restraint should be considered first and used if possible prior to chemical restraint. 1. Use physical restraint only if necessary for the protection of the crew or patient. The least amount of restraint necessary to accomplish the transport and care safely should be used. EMS personnel are not expected to place themselves in situations which might jeopardize their own personal safety. Whenever feasible, law enforcement personnel should be involved when physical restraints are required. 2. If restraint of the patient is necessary, adequate rescuers should be used to assure adequate protection to the rescuers and patient during the restraining process. If restraints have been applied, do not release until transfer at the hospital. 3. The goal of full restraint is to restrict the movement of all four extremities to protect the patient and others. Soft restraints or hard restraints with leather are acceptable. Handcuffs are for police use only. 4. Do not apply, remove, or adjust handcuffs without direct instruction and supervision by law enforcement. 5. When physical restraint is required, the receiving facility should be notified immediately after the patient is restrained. EMS personnel shall document, on the PCR, the indications for and the extent of restraint utilized on the patient. Circulation needs to be checked once restraints have been applied and documented on PCR. Reassess patient’s neurovascular status every 15 minutes. 6. Care should be taken to restrain the patient in a manner which allows for rapid and adequate airway maintenance. This can usually be accomplished by restraining the patient to a canvas stretcher or backboard which is then placed on the gurney. This allows the patient to be log rolled for airway control, as well as easing patient transfer at the hospital. If patient must be restrained directly to the ambulance gurney, place the patient on his/her side in the “swimmer’s position.”



---