# EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY POLICY NUMBER 748 A Division of the Merced County Department of Public Health SUBJECT: ADULT TREATMENT PROTOCOLS - OB-GYN EMERGENCIES Effective Date 10/2024 Authority: Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, and California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 9, Chapter 4, 1797.220 Initial Date: 10/2011 Review Date: 10/2026 PAGE 1 of 4 Signatures on File Approved By: Tim Williams Ajinder Singh, MD EMS Administrator EMS Medical Director STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE I. DEFINITION Birth may be imminent if the woman is having regular contractions/low back pain, bloody show, rupture of membranes or feels like bearing down/pushing/or having a bowel movement. Attempt to provide privacy and psychosocial support. Allow position of comfort and encourage controlled breathing. Obtain pertinent history: • Last menstrual period (LMP) • Determine gestational weeks in the pregnancy • Gravida (G) = how many pregnancies • Para (P) = how many live births • Determine the length of contractions and how far apart they are occurring • Assess for mental changes or change in vision (signs of Eclampsia) Always ask for permission and visualize vaginal opening for signs of crowning or abnormal presentations. II. BLS TREATMENT OXYGEN As appropriate, goal to maintain SpO2 at least 94%, assist ventilations as necessary. POSITION If in distress position mother in left lateral position. VITALS Assess vital signs. Monitor for pregnancy-induced hypertension (systolic blood pressure of greater than 140 mmHg, diastolic blood pressure greater than 90 mmHg) after 20th week. III. ALS TREATMENT MONITOR Treat rhythm as appropriate. VASCULAR ACCESS If time permits establish large bore IV and administer rate as appropriate or TKO. If the patient is hypotensive see EMS Policy \#738 Adult Treatment Protocols - Non-Traumatic Shock. Subject: ADULT TREATMENT PROTOCOLS - OB-GYN EMERGENCIES Policy Number 748 Page 2 of 4 STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE ROUTINE DELIVERY CONTROL DESCENT Cup hand over head to prevent explosive delivery. OF HEAD SUCTION MOUTH This should be accomplished before the first breath is taken. AND NOSE CHECK FOR CORD If present, slip cord over head or across shoulder. If cord is tight around the LOOPED AROUND neck and is preventing descent, double clamp and cut between clamps. THE NECK NOTE: Once the cord is clamped, the baby is without oxygen. Supplemental oxygen may be needed until the baby breathes on its own. HEAD ROTATES This step should happen spontaneously. LATERALLY DELIVER ANTERIOR Gently lower the head to deliver the anterior (upper) shoulder. SHOULDER If the anterior shoulder does not deliver, attempt to deliver posterior shoulder by gently raising the head. Alternate between the two until one shoulder delivers. After delivery of the shoulders, the body should then deliver smoothly. SUCTION MOUTH Immediately suction the mouth and nose with a bulb syringe. Hold the baby AND NOSE in a slightly head down position. DRY NEWBORN Place in a new, warm blanket to keep warm. Place the newborn on mother’s abdomen or breast. CUT CORD Double clamp the cord at approximately 7 inches and 10 inches from newborns navel and cut between clamps. ASSESS NEWBORN Assess infant for APGAR scoring at one (1) and five (5) minutes; continually reassess ABC’s. Refer to EMS Policy \#848 Pediatric Treatment Protocols - Newborn Resuscitation if indicated. MASSAGE FUNDUS Following delivery of baby, put the infant to mother’s breast and massage fundus. PLACENTA DELIVERY When placenta delivers, transport it in a plastic bag. Do not apply traction on cord in attempts to deliver placenta. Placenta should be delivered within 20 minutes after birth. Subject: ADULT TREATMENT PROTOCOLS - OB-GYN EMERGENCIES Policy Number 748 Page 3 of 4 STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE ECLAMPSIA WITH SEIZURES MIDAZOLAM Administer 2 mg IV/IO push. Titrate in 1 mg increments for seizure control with a maximum dose of 5 mg IV/IO. Administer 5 mg IN or IM if no immediate IV/IO access available. May repeat once after 10 minutes if seizures continue. MAGNESIUM Administer 2 gms in 10 ml saline slow IV push over 2 minutes if patient is SULFATE more than 24 weeks pregnant. ABNORMAL DELIVERIES PREMATURE LABOR • Infant may be delivered in the standard method. • Premature infant often times present with immature respiratory. Be prepared to resuscitate infant, seeneonatal resuscitation protocol. • If non-viable, save and transport any tissue or fetal remains. PROLASPED CORD • Position mother in knee chest position or elevate pelvis with pillows or wedge device. The head should be lower than the pelvis. • Insert sterile gloved hand into vagina \& gently push presenting part (head or shoulder) off the cord • Do not tug on the cord. • Do not attempt to push the cord back into the birth canal; cover exposed portion of cord with saline soaked gauze. • Do not remove your hand until hospital personnel assume care. • Do not attempt to reposition the cord. BREECH DELIVERY - BUTTOCKS PRESENTATION • Allow the infant to deliver buttocks and trunk (waist appears) spontaneously. • Once the legs are delivered, support the infants body, and allow the head to deliver. • Gently rotate the baby to a face down position and continue with the delivery. • If the head does not deliver, insert sterile gloved hand into the vagina and make a “V” around the baby’s nose to push the birth canal away from the face to allow for ventilation. This also takes some pressure off the cord. BREECH DELIVERY - LIMB PRESENTATION • If foot (leg) or hand (arm) presentation place mother in knee chest position or elevate pelvis with pillows or wedge device. The head should be lower than the pelvis. • It is unlikely that the baby will be delivered, and immediate transport should be initiated. Subject: ADULT TREATMENT PROTOCOLS - OB-GYN EMERGENCIES Policy Number 748 Page 4 of 4 STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE IV. SPECIAL CONSIDERATION AND PRIORITIES A. Assessment – Examine infant first, assess APGAR on all newborns (see APGAR Chart below). B. If signs of distress, Refer to EMS Policy \#848 Pediatric Treatment Protocols - Newborn Resuscitation. C. Estimate maternal blood loss. Placenta delivered? Always assess for twins. D. If delivery will occur prior to arrival at the hospital, delay transport and assist delivery at the scene. Variables to be considered are distance to hospital, road conditions, stage of labor, parity of mother, experience of personnel and quantity and skill of available assistants. E. If a patient is in labor and is pushing, discreetly inspect the perineum (digital exams are not done). If crowning, prepare to deliver at the scene. F. If inspection reveals a prolapsed cord or an abnormal presentation (foot, buttocks, hand, or face) transport immediately. The rare exception may be when transport time is long and delivery is far advanced (e.g., body delivered to beyond umbilicus). In this situation, the only hope for infant survival may be immediate on scene delivery. G. The vast majority of deliveries are completely uncomplicated and require minimal assistance. The major life threats are of neonatal asphyxia and maternal hemorrhage. Neonatal hypothermia is a real, but easily preventable threat. H. Document time of delivery of infant and placenta, who performed the delivery, and who cut the cord.



---