# EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY POLICY NUMBER 714 A Division of the Merced County Department of Public Health SUBJECT: ADULT TREATMENT PROTOCOLS - RESPIRATORY DISTRESS Effective Date 07/2024 Authority: Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, and California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 9, Chapter 4, 1797.220 Initial Date: 07/2022 Review Date: 07/2026 PAGE 1 of 2 Signatures on File Approved By: Tim Williams Ajinder Singh, MD EMS Administrator EMS Medical Director STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE I. DEFINITION Acute respiratory distress can have many causes: • COPD / ASTHMA / CHRONIC BRONCHITIS – Typically present with diffuse wheezes, rhonchi, tachypnea, pursed lips, accessory muscle use (tracheal tugging, intercostal retractions, tripod positioning) and cyanosis to lips and nails. • CONGESTIVE HEART FAILURE (Pulmonary Edema) – Typically presents with hypertension, rales, expiratory wheezes, and/or pink frothy sputum. • POSSIBLE AIRWAY OBSTRUCTIONS INCLUDING STRIDOR – Refer to EMS Policy \#712 Adult Treatment Protocols - AirwayObstructions Please note that in patients who are experiencing severe bronchospasm, in both Asthma and COPD, the breath sounds may sound clear, yet diminished. This is due to a decreased tidal volume and not moving enough air to create audible wheezing, these patients need respiratory assistance. Remember to do a complete assessment (ABC’s) on all respiratory distress patients. II. CONTINUOUS POSITIVE AIRWAY PRESSURE (CPAP) UTILIZATION Continuous Positive Airway Pressure (CPAP) Utilization • Indications: - CHF with pulmonary edema - Moderate to severe respiratory distress - Near drowning • Contraindications: - <8 years of age - Respiratory or cardiac arrest - Severe decreased LOC - Agonal respirations - Inability to maintain airway - Suspected pneumothorax - Systolic BP < 90 mmHg - Major trauma, especially head or significant chest trauma • Complications: - Hypotension - Pneumothorax - Corneal drying Epinephrine Administration • Epinephrine is only indicated for patients with suspected asthma who are in severe distress. • Use epinephrine cautiously in patients > 45 years of age, or with a history of coronary artery disease or hypertension. • Administer via auto-injector or IM epinephrine into the lateral thigh, midway between the waist and knee. Subject: ADULT TREATMENT PROTOCOLS - RESPIRATORY DISTRESS Policy Number 714 Page 2 of 4 STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE III. BLS TREATMENT BLS Vital Signs: Assess lung sounds, SPO2 > 94%, monitor patient and provide calming measures if necessary. Oxygen: Use as needed – use the least amount of oxygen necessary to relieve shortness of breath and maintain SpO2 > 94%. CPAP: Apply as indicated – continuous monitoring of SpO2 after CPAP is applied. History: Obtain medical history and perform physical assessment to determine the degree of illness (fever, sputum production, medications, asthma, COPD, CHF, exposures, hypertension, tachycardia, JVD, edema, etc.). Epinephrine (EMT local optional scope of practice only) Is the patient suspected of having asthma and in severe distress? Monitor and reassess No No Epinephrine 1:1,000 IM • Adult auto-injector OR • 0.3 mg (0.3 ml) via approved syringe (EMT local optional scope of practice only) YES NOTE: Epinephrine is only indicated for a patient with suspected or known asthma who are in severe distress. Use epinephrine cautiously in patients greater than 45 years of age, or with a history of known coronary disease. Administer epinephrine in the lateral thigh of the patient. NOTE: Assist if patient has a metered-dose inhaler (MDI) Subject: ADULT TREATMENT PROTOCOLS - RESPIRATORY DISTRESS Policy Number 714 Page 3 of 4 STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE IV. ALS TREATMENT Monitor: Treat rhythm as appropriate. Vascular Access: IV/IO access as appropriate for patient condition. EtCO2: Use is encouraged for patients in moderate to severe distress. ALS Mild Distress • Mild wheezing • Mild shortness of breath • Cough Moderate to Severe Distress • Accessory muscle use • Inability to speak > 3 words • Severe wheezing/shortness of breath • Decreased or absent air movement • Cardiac monitor • Consider IV NS (may bolus up to 1000ml) • Cardiac monitor • IV/IO NS (may bolus up to 1000 ml) Albuterol 5 mg • Nebulizer/CPAP/BVM • May repeat 2.5-5 mg for continued distress Albuterol 2.5 mg • Nebulizer • May repeat 2.5-5 mg for continued distress History of asthma with severe distress only Epinephrine 1:1,000 • 0.01 mg/kg IM (max dose: 0.5 mg) • May repeat after 20 minutes Magnesium Sulfate • 2 grams in 10 ml, slow IVP over 2 minutes • May repeat once after 5 minutes NOTE: Use epinephrine cautiously in patients > 45 years of age, or with a history of coronary artery disease. Asthma/COPD Subject: ADULT TREATMENT PROTOCOLS - RESPIRATORY DISTRESS Policy Number 714 Page 4 of 4 STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE ALS TREATMENT CONTINUED Monitor: Treat rhythm as appropriate. 12-Lead ECG for CHF/pulmonary edema patients. Vascular Access: IV/IO access as appropriate for patient condition. EtCO2: Use is encouraged for patients in moderate to severe distress CHF/Pulmonary Edema ALS Mild Signs and Symptoms Moderate to Severe Signs and Symptoms Nitroglycerine • 0.4 mg SL • May repeat every 5 minutes • Cardiac monitor • IV normal saline TKO Nitroglycerine: Dosage titrated by SBP • SBP 100-150 mmHg = 0.4 mg SL • SBP 150-200 mmHg = 0.8 mg SL • SBP > 200 mmHg = 1.2 mg SL Nitroglycerine Paste: Dosage titrated by SBP • SBP 100-120 mmHg = 1 inch • SBP > 120 mmHg = 2 inches • Cardiac monitor • Assess BP twice to confirm accuracy • IV/IO normal saline TKO Nitroglycerine Precautions • Do Not administer if SBP < 100 mmHg. • Do Not delay due to difficult vascular access. • Consult with Base Hospital prior to administration to patients taking erectile dysfunction or pulmonary hypertension medication. NOTE: PATIENTS WITH SBP < 90 MMHG AND PULMONARY EDEMA • PUSH DOSE EPINEPHRINE – 10 mcg (1 ml) IV/IO slow push every 15 minutes for SBP less than 90 mmHg Push Dose Epinephrine Mixing Instructions • Epinephrine 1:10,000 solution (1 mg/10 ml) • Waste 9 ml of solution from preload • Using the same preload, draw up 9 ml of normal saline • Shake well • Solution is now 10 ml of fluid with a concentration of 10 mcg/ml (0.01 mg/ml) • Label syringe “Epinephrine 10 mcg/ml” ***Use EXTREME caution when administering epinephrine via IV Push***



---