# EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY POLICY NUMBER 525 A Division of the Merced County Department of Public Health SUBJECT: HOSPITAL IMPACT EVALUATION Effective Date: 08/2025 Authority: California Health and Safety Code, Section 1797.220 California Health and Safety Code, Section 1300 (c). Initial Date: 07/1999 Review Date: 08/2028 PAGE 1 of 2 Signatures on File Approved By: Tim Williams Ajinder Singh, MD EMS Administrator EMS Medical Director STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE I. PURPOSE To provide a mechanism for the Merced County EMS Agency to evaluate and report on the potential impact on the EMS System as a result of the reduction or closure of emergency services in hospitals. II. POLICY It is the policy of the Merced County EMS Agency to ensure, to the degree possible, that EMS system operations are planned in a prospective fashion to allow for the most effective and efficient use of resources. Hospitals that reduce or close emergency services negatively impact system operations. To mitigate the impact upon the EMS system, any hospital intending to reduce or close emergency services shall comply with the provisions herein. III. PROCEDURE A. Acute care hospitals intending to implement either a reduction or closure of emergency services shall advise the EMS Agency as soon as possible, but at least 90 days prior to the proposed change. The proposal must include: 1. Reason for the proposed change(s). 2. Itemization of the services currently provided and the exact nature of the proposed change(s). 3. Description of the local geography, surrounding services, and for Base Hospitals, the average volume of calls. 4. Description of potential impact on the EMS community regarding patient volume and type of prehospital and emergency department services available. Include a pre/post comparison. 5. Description of potential impact on the public regarding accessibility of comparable alternative facilities or services. Include a pre/post comparison. B. Within 45 days of notification from the hospital of their intent to change the emergency services provided, the EMS Agency will produce a draft impact evaluation report regarding the proposed changes. The criteria which will be addressed in the impact evaluation report will include: Subject: HOSPITAL IMPACT EVALUATION Policy Number 525 Page 2 of 2 STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE 1. Geography (service population density and relative isolation, travel time and distance to nearest facility, number and type of other available emergency services, availability of prehospital resources). 2. Base Hospital designation (if applicable) (number of calls, impact on patients, prehospital personnel and other Base Hospitals). 3. Specialty services provided. 4. Patient volume. 5. Feedback received from a public hearing on the issue. C. The EMS Agency will facilitate a process for prehospital and hospital input into the impact evaluation report. This process shall include: 1. Review by the Emergency Medical Care Committee (EMCC), time permitting. 2. Release of the draft impact evaluation report to prehospital and hospital emergency services agencies, with a ten (10) day comment period. D. Within 45 days of hospital notification to the EMS Agency of the intent to change emergency services provided by the hospital, the EMS Agency will conduct a public hearing on the matter in conjunction with the Public Health Director and the EMS Medical Director. E. The hospital will serve notice of the public hearing to the community through standard and reasonable efforts (i.e., local newspapers and notices at hospitals). F. At the completion of the public hearing and comment period on the impact evaluation report (no later than sixty (60) days from the time of notification to reduce or close hospital emergency services), the needs assessment and impact report will be submitted to the Department of Health Services, the State EMS Authority, the Emergency Medical Care Committee and interested parties. G. The State Department of Health Services will make the final determination as to the nature of emergency services to be provided by the hospital seeking reduction or closure. H. The hospital proposing a reduction or closure of service(s) will be charged a \$1500.00 fee by the Merced County EMS Agency for the impact evaluation.



---