# EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY POLICY NUMBER 722 A Division of the Merced County Department of Public Health SUBJECT: ADULT TREATMENT PROTOCOLS - STROKE Effective Date 09/2023 Authority: Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, and California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 9, Chapter 4, 1797.220 Initial Date: 05/2018 Review Date: 09/2025 PAGE 1 of 2 Signatures on File Approved By: Tim Williams Ajinder Singh, MD EMS Administrator EMS Medical Director STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE I. DEFINITION Sudden onset of symptoms is defined as six (6) hours or less. Characterized by sudden onset of weakness or paralysis on one side of the body or face, slurred speech, speech difficulty, trouble with balance, headache, visual disturbances (blindness, fixed lateral gaze). Designated Stroke Centers – Mercy Medical Center Merced, Memorial Hospital Los Banos, Doctors Medical Center (Comprehensive), Memorial Medical Center II. BLS TREATMENT Focus on the onset of symptoms. OXYGEN As appropriate, goal to maintain SpO₂ at least 94%, assist ventilations as necessary. VITALS Assess vitals. BLOOD SUGAR Test glucose and treat as appropriate. CHECK NEURO STATUS Asses for signs of Stroke with Cincinnati Prehospital Stroke Scale. CHECK DOCUMENTATION Document Cincinnati Prehospital Stroke Scale and last time patient was seen normal. III. ALS TREATMENT Focus on the onset of symptoms. VASCULAR ACCESS IV/IO and keep at TKO. TRANSPORT Patient is to be transported to the closest receiving Stroke Center, advise receiving facility of Stroke Alert as soon as possible. Subject: ADULT TREATMENT PROTOCOLS - STROKE Policy Number 722 Page 2 of 2 STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE IV. CINCINNATI PREHOSPITAL STROKE SCALE FACIAL DROOP Asked patient to smile show teeth. NORMAL Both sides of face move equally. ABNORMAL One side of face does not move as well as the other. ARM DRIFT Asked patient to close eyes and hold up both arms for 10 seconds. NORMAL Both arms move up the same or both arms do not move at all. ABNORMAL One arm does not move, or one arm drifts down compared with the other. SPEECH Asked patient to repeat simple phrase e.g.," You can't teach an old dog new tricks." NORMAL The patient says correct words with no slurring of words. ABNORMAL The patient slurs words, says the wrong words, or is unable to speak.



---