# EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY POLICY NUMBER 724 A Division of the Merced County Department of Public Health SUBJECT: ADULT TREATMENT PROTOCOLS ALTERED LEVEL OF CONSCIOUSNESS (ALOC) OR SYNCOPE Effective Date 07/2024 Authority: Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, and California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 9, Chapter 4, 1797.220 Initial Date: 05/2011 Review Date: 07/2026 PAGE 1 of 2 Signatures on File Approved By: Tim Williams Ajinder Singh, MD EMS Administrator EMS Medical Director STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE I. DEFINITION Altered Level of Consciousness (ALOC) or also referred to as altered mental status is characterized by a Glasgow Coma Score of less than 15, confusion, and/or unconsciousness. II. BLS TREATMENT OXYGEN As appropriate, goal to maintain SpO2 at least 94%, assist ventilations as necessary. VITALS Assess vitals. BLOOD SUGAR Test glucose and treat as appropriate. CHECK ORAL GLUCOSE One (1) unit dose – if blood glucose less than 60 mg/dl with history of diabetes and patient can swallow. Recheck blood sugar after 3-5 minutes and repeat as necessary. NALOXONE If suspected narcotic intoxication and respiratory depression (rate 8 or less), administer as follows: • Administer 2 mg IN (intranasal – 1 mg per nostril) for respiratory depression if narcotic overdose is suspected (e.g., pinpoint pupils, track marks, drug paraphernalia, history of narcotic use, etc.) or • Administer FULL DOSE of prepackaged Naloxone and spray in one nostril. • Repeat once after 3-5 minutes if no response. AIRWAY Secure airway with approved supraglottic airway device as necessary. (For MANAGEMENT Approved EMT Personnel Only) III. ALS TREATMENT MONITOR Treat rhythm as appropriate. Subject: ADULT TREATMENT PROTOCOLS ALTERED LEVEL OF CONSCIOUSNESS (ALOC) OR SYNCOPE Policy Number 724 Page 2 of 2 STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE 12-LEAD ECG Perform a 12-Lead ECG for any syncope or near syncopal episode of suspected cardiac origin. VASSCULAR Rate as appropriate if patient has a systolic BP < 90 administer 250 ml fluid ACCESS boluses to systolic BP > 90. Reassess patient after each bolus. DEXTROSE If blood glucose is less than 60 mg/dl administer D10 150 ml (15 grams) to 250 ml (25 grams) IV infusion titrated to desired effect or 25 grams D50 IV push. Recheck blood sugar after 3-5 minutes and repeat as necessary. GLUCAGON If blood glucose is less than 60 mg/dl administer 1 mg IM if no IV access, recheck blood sugar after 3-5 minutes, may repeat once. NALOXONE If suspected narcotic intoxication and respiratory depression (rate 8 or less), administer as follows: • Administer 2 mg IN (intranasal – 1 mg per nasal) for respiratory depression if narcotic overdose is suspected (e.g., pinpoint pupils, track marks, drug paraphernalia, history of narcotic use, etc.) • Repeat IN after 3-5 minutes if no response. If no response after administration of 2 mg IN doses, administer 1 mg IV/IM titrated to increased respiratory effort or until a total of 10 mg of naloxone has been given. AIRWAY Secure airway with oral intubation or approved supraglottic airway device as MANAGEMENT necessary. IV. SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS Synthetic narcotics (Fentanyl or Carfentanyl) may require higher doses to restore respiratory effort. Naloxone must be administered before securing the airway and IN (intranasal) is the preferred route.



---