# EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY POLICY NUMBER 542 A Division of the Merced County Department of Public Health SUBJECT: PATIENT CONSENT FOR AND REFUSAL OF EMERGENCY MEDICAL CARE AND TRANSPORTATION Effective Date: 08/2025 Authority: California Health and Safety Code Sections 1797.220 – 1797.226 California Welfare and Institutions Code, Sections 5150 and 5170 California Family Code Sections 6500, 6922(a), 6926(a), 7002 and 7050(e) California Code of Regulations Chapter 1.5, Div. 9, Title 22 Initial Date: 11/2010 Review Date: 08/2028 PAGE 1 of 4 Signatures on File Approved By: Tim Williams Ajinder Singh, MD EMS Administrator EMS Medical Director STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE I. PURPOSE To provide direction to all Merced County Emergency Medical Services (EMS) personnel regarding the procedures to be followed when a patient is refusing prehospital medical care and transportation, requests to be released at scene, partially refuses treatment, when the patient is a minor, or when the patient is acutely or chronically incompetent to make such medical decisions. II. DEFINITION Authorized Legal Representative – A parent or guardian of a minor; a conservator who presents letters of conservatorship stating that the patient is not competent to give or withhold consent for medical care; an attorney-in-fact appointed under a durable power of attorney for health care; or, in the absence of any of the above, the patient's closest available relative. Letters of conservatorship need to be specific with regard to the patient's lack of competence to give or withhold consent - if the document is silent on this issue, consult a Base Hospital Physician. Competency – The ability to understand the nature and consequences of the treatment and/or transportation for which consent is sought and to use that understanding to make a decision based upon the individual's own personal values and priorities. In the absence of evidence to the contrary, an individual is assumed to be "competent". Consent – The consent given by a patient or his/her authorized legal representative (either verbally, written or by voluntarily submitting to treatment) who is competent to give consent for medical care after having been informed of the nature and purpose of the proposed care and/or transportation. Consent in a "5150" Hold Situation – A patient does not have to be competent to consent (or withhold consent) for treatment when the patient, as a result of mental disorder, presents a danger to himself or herself, a danger to others, and/or is gravely disabled. In this case, the patient is held against his or her will on the order of law enforcement or a County-approved mental health professional, consistent with the provisions of Section 5150 of the Welfare and Institutions Code. Consent for care is implied for emergency conditions when a patient is not competent. Subject PATIENT CONSENT FOR AND REFUSAL OF EMERGENCY MEDICAL CARE AND TRANSPORTATION Policy Number 542 Page 2 of 4 STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE Implied Consent – In an emergency situation, where immediate services are necessary to alleviate severe pain or failure to diagnose and treat the medical condition could lead to serious disability or death, consent is implied when the patient is unable to provide consent due to impairments secondary to illness, injury, alcohol, drugs, minority (patient is a minor) or mental disorder, so long as there is no evidence that the patient would have refused such services if he or she were competent to do so. Emergency care must be limited only to the condition giving rise to the emergency. Minor's Consent – In most cases, a person under the age of 18 is not competent to consent (or withhold consent) for medical care. Therefore, the consent of a parent or legal guardian is required. Additionally, if the parent or legal guardian cannot be reached, school officials may provide consent for medical care for their minor students who become injured or ill during regular school hours. This provision does not apply to a minor student when their parent or legal guardian has previously filed with the school district a written objection to any medical care other than first aid. If the minor's parents/legal guardian/school officials are unavailable, the minor must be placed under the protection of law enforcement until the parents/legal guardian can be notified. There are exceptions in state law which does allow a person under the age of 18 to be considered as a person to be competent to give or to withhold consent, including if he or she has been legally married, is in military service, is an emancipated minor, or if she is seeking medical care or treatment related to pregnancy (e.g., pregnancy complications). Additionally, there are some specific types of medical care to which a person under the age of 18 can consent; however, these are generally unrelated to emergency care services. Patient – Means any person encountered by EMS Personnel who meet any of the following: • Person(s) who has a medical complaint needing assessment, medical care, and/or treatment. • Manifests any evidence of illness or injury. • Exhibits signs of impaired capacity and who cannot understand the urgent nature of their medical condition. • Any person who requests an assessment. Refusal of Assessment, Care and/or Transportation – A patient that is competent to give consent for medical care is also competent to refuse medical care or transportation. In the EMS System, this may include the refusal of either or all of the following: • Patient assessment, • Medical care (including specific aspects of care being refused, such as IVs, etc.), • Transportation to a medical facility, or • Destination (transportation to an appropriate facility, e.g., trauma center, STEMI center, nearby emergency department). If a patient refuses transportation or destination, the EMT or Paramedic will continue to provide care per EMS policies and procedures until the patient signs the refusal of care or transportation form (AMA or RAS), the ambulance arrives at the alternate facility, or the Base Hospital intervenes. Subject PATIENT CONSENT FOR AND REFUSAL OF EMERGENCY MEDICAL CARE AND TRANSPORTATION Policy Number 542 Page 3 of 4 STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE III. POLICY A. Competent adults are entitled to make decisions about their health care. They have the right to refuse medical care or may be released at the scene when they have been properly informed of the benefits, risks and alternatives to the recommended care. This policy defines the mechanism by which a patient who summoned emergency care, or for whom such emergency care was summoned, may refuse care and transportation, or be released at the scene. B. EMS personnel shall, if the patient's condition allows, obtain the patient's consent for care and/or transport prior to initiating such procedures. C. In situations where the patient is unable to provide consent, and no authorized legal representative is immediately available, EMS personnel shall, consistent with established policies and procedures, and with consultation from the Base Hospital, provide for necessary emergency care and transportation. This applies to situations where the patient is unable to make a decision due to impairment secondary to illness, injury, alcohol, drugs, age or mental disorder. D. In situations where the patient is making a decision to refuse emergency medical care and/or transportation, EMS personnel shall, after informing the patient of the potential medical risks of the patient's decision, documenting the incident, and, if applicable under EMS policy, consulting a Base Hospital Physician, honor the patent's refusal of care and/or transportation. E. If the patient's authorized legal representative is immediately available, EMS personnel shall advise such person and honor that person's consent or refusal of care and/or transportation on behalf of the patient. IV. PROCEDURE A. Against Medical Advice (AMA) When EMS personnel evaluate a competent patient and find that treatment and transportation are indicated, all diligence and judgment will be used to convince the patient to agree to treatment and transportation. The AMA process shall include the following: 1. Advise of risks and alternatives. 2. Assure that the patient understands the risks of refusing treatment and transport. 3. Assure that the patient is encouraged to seek medical care. 4. Base hospital contact is not required in every AMA case. However, if EMS Personnel are experiencing difficulty in convincing a competent person to be transported, and dependent upon the patient’s complaint, severity or clinical signs/symptoms, Base Hospital contact and consultation may be appropriate. Refer to EMS Policy \#300 – Patient Refusal of Care and Transportation Screening Form for Base Hospital contact criteria. Subject PATIENT CONSENT FOR AND REFUSAL OF EMERGENCY MEDICAL CARE AND TRANSPORTATION Policy Number 542 Page 4 of 4 STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE B. Release at Scene (RAS) EMS Personnel may release a competent patient at scene after completing a primary and secondary patient assessment and both the EMS Personnel and the patient or authorized legal representative agree that no medical need exists or that the patient’s underlying medical condition does not appear to require immediate medical assistance. In this situation, EMS Personnel will complete a PCR to document the details of the encounter including why the patient was released at scene. C. Partial Refusal of Treatment Partial refusal of treatment occurs when a competent individual having a medical condition requiring specific procedure(s) and/or medication(s) refuses certain procedure(s) and/or medication(s) while accepting others. Document on the Patient Care Report all occurrences of partial refusal of treatment and specifically what procedure(s) and/or medication(s) that were refused. D. In accordance with EMS Policy \#540 Patient Documentation, a Patient Care Report shall be completed on all patient contacts. The PCR shall document all patient assessments and/or medical care rendered to the patient by any EMS prehospital care provider. The PCR must also specifically document any events where refusal of assessment, medical care and/or transport occurred. The Against Medical Advise/Release at Scene (AMA/RAS) Form shall be completed for each patient encountered and is refusing medical care ortransportation. Obtain the patient’s signature on the Against Medical Advise / Release at Scene (AMA/RAS) Form. The prehospital EMS Personnel obtaining the signature shall sign as a witness to the patient’s signature. If the patient refuses to sign the form, the refusal shall be so documented by the prehospital EMS Personnel and witnessed by law enforcement, a fire service representative, a family member or, if none of the foregoing are available, by the prehospital EMS Personnel’s partner.



---