# EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY POLICY NUMBER 704 A Division of the Merced County Department of Public Health SUBJECT: ADULT TREATMENT PROTOCOLS - CHEST PAIN / DISCOMFORT Effective Date 07/2023 Authority: Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, and California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 9, Chapter 4, 1797.220 Initial Date: 07/2022 Review Date: 07/2025 PAGE 1 of 2 Signatures on File Approved By: Tim Williams Ajinder Singh, MD EMS Administrator EMS Medical Director STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE I. DEFINITION Substernal chest pain; chest or epigastric discomfort, heaviness, squeezing, burning or tightness; pain radiating to, or isolated to jaw, shoulders, arms or back; nausea; diaphoresis; dizziness; dyspnea; anxiety or back pain. Patients may or may not have a history of coronary artery disease. Up to 1/4 of coronary ischemia (Acute Coronary Syndrome) patients may have no chest discomfort at all. This is more common in women, elderly, and diabetics. Patients can also present with signs and symptoms of CHF/Pulmonary Edema, leg swelling, or history of DVT/PE. II. BLS TREATMENT OXYGEN As appropriate, goal to maintain SpO2 at least 94%. Assist ventilations as necessary. VITALS Assess vital signs. ASPRIN Administer 324 mg of chewable ASA PO. ASA is not contraindicated with the history of anticoagulant use. ASA is contraindicated with signs of ACTIVE GI bleeding. NITROGLYCERIN If SBP ≥ 100 mmHg EMTs may assist a patient with their prescribed sublingual NTG 0.4 mg tablets or spray, may repeat every five (5) minutes to a maximum of three (3) total doses. Contact Base Hospital before administering NTG to patients taking Viagra (sildenafil) or similar erectile disfunction drugs within the past six (6) hours. III. ALS TREATMENT MONITOR Treat rhythm as appropriate. 12-LEAD ECG Perform a 12-Lead ECG within ten (10) minutes of patient contact. If the 12- Lead ECG reads STEMI or Acute MI or an equivalent; transmit the 12-Lead ECG to appropriate STEMI Receiving Center. Subject: ADULT TREATMENT PROTOCOLS - CHEST PAIN / DISCOMFORT Policy Number 704 Page 2 of 2 STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE NITROGLYCERIN If SBP ≥ 100 mmHg, administer 0.4 mg NTG, may repeat every five (5) minutes to a maximum of three (3) total doses. Contact Base Hospital before administering NTG to patients taking erectile dysfunction (Viagra (sildenafil), Cialis (tadalafil), etc.) or oral pulmonary hypertension meds within the past six (6) hours. VASCULAR ACCESS IV/IO rate as appropriate. If patient has a systolic BP < 90 mmHg administer 250 ml fluid boluses to systolic BP > 90 mmHg. Reassess patient after each bolus assessing for signs of fluid overload. CAPNOGRAPHY Utilize waveform capnography; EtCO2 readings of 25 mmHg or less are suggestive of poor organ perfusion. TRANSPORT For patients whose 12-Lead ECG meets STEMI criteria, transport patients to closest approved STEMI Receiving Center. Keep scene times to under 15 minutes. PAIN MANAGEMENT If patient continues to have chest pain after Nitroglycerine (NTG). Refer to EMS Policy \#718 Adult Treatment Protocols - Pain Management. ONDANSETRON Administer 4 mg ODT/IV/IM/IO for nausea or vomiting. Every attempt should be made to administer ODT as first route if possible. May repeat every 10 minutes with no relief of symptoms to max dose of 12 mg total.



---