# EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY POLICY NUMBER 730 A Division of the Merced County Department of Public Health SUBJECT: ADULT TREATMENT PROTOCOLS - HYPERGLYCEMIA Effective Date 07/2024 Authority: Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, and California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 9, Chapter 4, 1797.220 Initial Date: 09/2018 Review Date: 07/2026 PAGE 1 of 2 Signatures on File Approved By: Tim Williams Ajinder Singh, MD EMS Administrator EMS Medical Director STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE I. DEFINITION Elevated blood glucose levels (Hyperglycemia) can be a medical emergency. • High glucose levels in Type 1 diabetics can cause diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA). • High glucose in Type 2 diabetics can cause hyperosmolar hyperglycemic non-ketoacidosis (HHNK). Both DKA and HHNK are characterized by: Thirst and increased urination, drowsiness, confusion, dehydration, nausea, vomiting, and missed medication doses. Patients with DKA may also present with: Fruity odor on breath, deep and rapid respirations (Kussmaul Respirations). Both DKA and HHNK can be life threatening if left untreated. Both DKA and HHNK are associated with possible infections. Patients with hyperglycemia should be screened for potential sepsis per EMS Policy \#720 Adult Treatment Protocols - Sepsis. II. BLS TREATMENT OXYGEN As appropriate, goal to maintain SpO2 at least 94%. Assist ventilations as necessary. VITALS Assess vital signs. BLOOD SUGAR Test blood glucose. III. ALS TREATMENT MONITOR Treat rhythm as appropriate. CAPNOGRAPHY Utilize waveform capnography, EtCO2 readings of 25mmHg or less is suggestive of acidosis (DKA). IV ACCESS Rate as appropriate, if patient has a systolic BP less than 90, administer 250 ml fluid boluses until systolic BP is greater than 90. Reassess patient after Subject: ADULT TREATMENT PROTOCOLS - HYPERGLYCEMIA Policy Number 730 Page 2 of 2 STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE each bolus for signs of fluid overload (severe pedal edema, rales, etc.). Diabetic Ketoacidosis If blood sugar is greater than 400 mg/dl, and the patient has an EtCO2 (DKA) reading less than or equal to 25mmHg, AND the patient shows no signs of fluid overload, administer 500 ml bolus, reassessing patient for signs of fluid overload after 500 ml infused. Hyperosmolar If blood sugar is greater than 400 mg/dl and the patient shows signs of Hyperglycemic dehydration (dry mucous membranes, poor skin turgor, headache, etc.) Non-Ketoacidosis AND the patient shows no signs of fluid overload, administer 500 ml bolus, (HHNK) reassessing patient for signs of fluid overload after 500 ml infused.



---