# EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY POLICY NUMBER 718 A Division of the Merced County Department of Public Health SUBJECT: ADULT TREATMENT PROTOCOLS - PAIN MANAGEMENT Effective Date 01/2025 Authority: Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, and California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 9, Chapter 4, 1797.220 Initial Date: 01/2017 Review Date: 01/2027 PAGE 1 of 4 Signatures on File Approved By: Tim Williams Ajinder Singh, MD EMS Administrator EMS Medical Director STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE I. DEFINITION Pain is a subjective unpleasant sensory and emotional experience associated with actual or potential tissue damage. Any patient with a complaint of moderate or significant pain including but not limited to burn patients, frostbite, bites and envenomation, crush injuries, extremity injuries, traumatic injuries, abdominal pain, sickle cell crisis, cancer, prolonged extrication, renal colic, etc. May use morphine or fentanyl alone or in combination up to a max of 20 mg morphine equivalents. Ketamine MAY NOT be administered in conjunction with morphine or fentanyl. Morphine Equivalents: 10 mg morphine = 100 mcg fentanyl 5 mg morphine \& 50 mcg fentanyl = 10 mg morphine II. BLS TREATMENT OXYGEN As appropriate. Keep SpO2 at least 94%, assist with ventilations as necessary. VITALS Assess vital signs and check for pulse up to 60 seconds. POSITION Splint injured extremity, ice and elevation as needed to prevent swelling. PSYCHOLOGICAL Reassure patient. SUPPORT III. ALS TREATMENT BLS Follow BLS Procedures if Applicable. MONITOR Treat rhythm as appropriate. VASCULAR ACCESS Establish IV/IO normal saline preferred, rather than saline lock. CAPNOGRAPHY Utilize wave form capnography for narcotic doses greater than 10 mg morphine equivalent or with ketamine administration. Subject: ADULT TREATMENT PROTOCOLS - PAIN MANAGEMENT Policy Number 718 Page 2 of 4 STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE MILD TO MODERATE PAIN – 1 TO 5 ON PAIN SCALE. MAY ADMINISTER ONE OR BOTH OF THESE AGENTS ACETAMINOPHEN If < 50 kg: Administer 15 mg/kg maximum 750 mg IV/IO infusion over 20 minutes, SINGLE DOSE ONLY. If > 50 kg: Administer 1000 mg IV/IO infusion over 20 minutes, SINGLE DOSE ONLY. Consider an alternate IV/IO site if necessary. KETOROLAC Administer 15 mg slow IV/IO push over 15 seconds or 30 mg IM/IN SINGLE DOSE ONLY. Acetaminophen and/or Ketorolac may be administered in addition to opioids for patients with severe pain. Ketorolac is the preferred agent for patients with suspected kidney stones or chronic back pain. Do not administer acetaminophen to patients with severe hepatic impairment or active liver disease. Do not administer ketorolac with history of renal disease or kidney transplant; hypotension defined as systolic BP less than 90 mm Hg; history of GI bleeding or ulcers; current anticoagulation therapy or active bleeding; current steroid use; greater than 65 years of age; known allergy or hypersensitivity to NSAIDS (non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medications); history of Asthma; pregnant or high possibility of pregnancy; headaches suspected from acute intracranial bleed. SEVERE PAIN – 5 OR HIGHER ON PAIN SCALE MORPHINE Administer IV/IO 2-5 mg. May repeat every 5 to 10 minutes as needed. Max SULFATE single dose is 5 mg. Max total dose 20 mg. Administer IM 5-10 mg. May repeat once in 10 to 15 minutes. If a repeat dose is needed, highly consider IV access. Max total dose 20 mg. FENTANYL Administer IV/IO 25-50 mcg, slow IV push. May repeat 25-50mcg IV/IO every 5 minutes, ONLY if systolic BP is greater than 90. Total max dose of 200 mcg. Administer IM 25-50 mcg. May repeat every 15 to 20 minutes, ONLY if systolic BP is greater than 90. Total max of 200 mcg. If a repeat dose is needed, consider IV/IO access. Administer IN 1.5 mcg/kg, single max dose 75 mcg. Administer half (½) dose to each nostril. May repeat once after 10 minutes ONLY if systolic BP is greater than 90 systolic. NOTE: BASE HOSPITAL CONTACT NEEDED FOR FENTANYL IV/IO/IM DOSES OVER 200 mcg. Subject: ADULT TREATMENT PROTOCOLS - PAIN MANAGEMENT Policy Number 718 Page 3 of 4 STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE KETAMINE INDICATIONS – The utilization of prehospital Ketamine should be considered for acute pain including traumatic or burn injuries in all patients that have a pain score of 5 or greater on a pain scale of 1-10 and that meet ALL of the following criteria: 1. Age 15 years and older. 2. GCS (Glasgow Coma Scale) of 15. CONTRAINDICATIONS: 1. Known or suspected alcohol or drug intoxication. 2. Known or suspected pregnancy. 3. Allergy to Ketamine. DO NOT PUSH KETAMINE IV/IO. KETAMINE AND FENTANYL OR MORPHINE MAY NOT BE ADMINISTERED TO THE SAME PATIENT. KETAMINE Prepare 0.3 mg/kg to a maximum single dose of 30 mg. Mixed in 100-250 ml of normal saline or D5W. Administer SLOW IV/IO INFUSION for over 5 minutes. May repeat after 15 minutes if pain scale remains at 5 or higher. Administer 0.5 mg/kg IM/IN to a maximum single dose of 30 mg. If IN, administer half (½) dose to each nostril; May repeat after 15 minutes if pain scale remains at 5 or higher. BASE HOSPITAL ORDER: 1. Isolated head injury. 2. Acute onset severe headache. 3. Drug/ETOH ingestion or intoxication. 4. Multisystem trauma patient with GCS less than 15. BE SURE TO INFORM THE NURSE OR PHYSICIAN AT RECEIVING FACILITY THAT THE PATIENT RECEIVED KETAMINE PRIOR TO ARRIVAL. Documentation: 1. Initial vital signs (including weight) and initial pain score and subsequent pain scores (Utilize standard pain scales, i.e., Wong-Baker or numeric scale). Subject: ADULT TREATMENT PROTOCOLS - PAIN MANAGEMENT Policy Number 718 Page 4 of 4 STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE 2. GCS: pre, during, and post medication administration. 3. Vital signs: pre and post medication administration. 4. Time medication was given. 5. Total dose of medication. 6. Any adverse or side effects related to medication. MANDATED PAIN SCALE IV. SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS Administer Fentanyl slowly to prevent Rigid Chest Syndrome. Naloxone may reverse Rigid Chest Syndrome. Ondansetron can be used to prevent or treat nausea associated with narcotic administration, please refer to EMS POLICY \#716 - Adult Treatment Protocols - Nausea and Vomiting. Do not utilize with patients who have a GCS less than 14. Use with caution in patients who have sustained a traumatic brain injury and are under the influence of other substances (alcohol, illicit drugs, and sedatives/hypnotics). If a patient shows signs of respiratory depression (shallow respirations and rate less than 8) administer Naloxone 0.5 mg IV/IO, IN, and IM as necessary to increase respiratory rate. Do not use Naloxone for pinpoint pupils only.



---