# EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY POLICY NUMBER 425 A Division of the Merced County Department of Public Health SUBJECT: TURNOVER RESPONSIBILITY BETWEEN PREHOSPITAL UNITS Effective Date 01/2025 Authority: Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, and California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 9, Chapter 4, 1797.220 Initial Date: 01/2025 Review Date: 01/2027 PAGE 1 of 3 Signatures on File Approved By: Tim Williams Ajinder Singh, MD EMS Administrator EMS Medical Director STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE I. POLICY Responsibility for patient care in the prehospital setting may be transferred between prehospital personnel according to established procedures. These procedures are applicable for turnover responsibility to or from EMS units within Merced County as well as other counties. II. PROCEDURE A. TRANSFER OF RESPONSIBILITY BETWEEN AGENCIES 1. This type of turnover may occur between a First Response provider and transport provider or two transport provider agencies. If the patient does not require care from both providers while enroute, the transporting provider should accept responsibility for the patient and allow the First Responder or other transport provider agency to return to service. NOTE: The purpose of First Responders is to provide immediate care until an appropriately staffed ambulance arrives at the scene, and transfer of patient care responsibility occurs. This allows the First Responders to become available for additional responses. It is expected that the turnover between first responder and ambulance personnel will be professional, orderly and that the continuity of care initiated by the first responders is continued. 2. The First Responder or non-transporting provider shall provide the transport personnel with a complete report on the patient's condition. B. MECHANICAL PROBLEMS OR LIMITATIONS If the initial transport unit is unable to complete the transfer, the turnover of patient responsibility should be handled as quickly and professionally as possible. Care should be taken not to alarm the patient or the family. 1. A turnover may be made only after a full report has been given to the transport provider and they have accepted full responsibility for the patient. In this case, the initial Paramedic need not accompany the patient during transport unless the patient is STAT and/or would benefit from the additional personnel. The transfer of care must be properly documented on the Subject: TURNOVER RESPONSIBILITY BETWEEN PREHOSPITAL UNITS Policy Number 425 Page 2 of 3 STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE Patient Care Report (PCR). 2. These same procedures should be utilized for turnovers between specialized transport vehicles such as a helicopter or an ambulance with snow chains as long as the delay caused by the turnover is offset by an overall more rapid transport. C. TRANSFER TO HIGHER CERTIFIED PERSONNEL If the responsibility for a patient is being transferred from BLS personnel to ALS personnel, the transfer must be properly documented on the PCR, and both units shall be noted on the PCR. D. TRANSFER TO LOWER CERTIFIED PERSONNEL At the discretion of the paramedic, transfer of a patient to personnel of a lower certification level is appropriate if the patient has received an assessment by a paramedic and it is determined that the patient requires no ALS care. This includes the following types of situations: 1. At the scene of a multiple patient incident where a BLS ambulance has been requested for transport of non-stat BLS patient(s). 2. ALS ambulance rendezvous with a BLS ambulance to turnover a patient not requiring ALS care in order for the ALS ambulance to return to its primary service area. These rendezvous’ will occur within its own agency unless the ambulance provider has an agreement with an adjacent ambulance provider to provide that service. 3. ALS First Responder turnover of a patient to a BLS ambulance. 4. ALS ambulance transfer of patient to a BLS ambulance in a hospital emergency department for continued monitoring while waiting for Emergency Department bed. E. TRANSFER AT COMMITTED STAND-BY EVENTS In order to maintain continuity of personnel at stand-by events, EMS personnel may turn over nonstat patients to an appropriately staffed transport ambulance. If the patient presents in a stat condition, the stand-by unit must provide transport unless another appropriately staffed transport ambulance is immediately available. F. SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES A single ALS transport unit at the scene of a multiple patient incident may initiate stat transport of a critical patient without Base Hospital approval under all of the following conditions: 1. The patient is triaged as stat (triage as immediate priority). 2. The remaining patient(s) are stable (triage as minor priority). 3. First Responder personnel are on scene. Subject: TURNOVER RESPONSIBILITY BETWEEN PREHOSPITAL UNITS Policy Number 425 Page 3 of 3 STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE 4. A second ALS unit is enroute to the scene. 5. The ALS transport unit consults with the Incident Commander prior to departing. G. DOCUMENTATION The transfer of patient responsibility must be properly documented on the PCR, and both units shall be noted on the PCR. Units involved in the transfer of the patient must provide a separate PCR for each unit.


---