# EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY POLICY NUMBER 732 A Division of the Merced County Department of Public Health SUBJECT: ADULT TREATMENT PROTOCOLS - HYPERTHERMIA Effective Date 10/2024 Authority: Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, and California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 9, Chapter 4, 1797.220 Initial Date: 10/2011 Review Date: 10/2026 PAGE 1 of 2 Signatures on File Approved By: Tim Williams Ajinder Singh, MD EMS Administrator EMS Medical Director STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE I. DEFINITION Elevated core body temperatures above normal limits, usually caused by prolonged exposure to an excessive heat environment, inadequate fluid intake and the associated fluid loss. HEAT EXHAUSTION - Occurs when a prolonged fluid loss is caused by perspiration, diarrhea or diuretics and exposure to warm to hot heat environment with inadequate fluid and electrolyte replacement. Muscle cramping, dizziness, exhaustion, nausea, vomiting, weakness, headache, diaphoresis, normal or slightly elevated body temperature. Syncope and an altered level of consciousness may occur. HEAT STROKE - Loss of thermoregulation function resulting in signs of shock, ALOC, with dry flushed and hot to touch skin, seizures are possible. Core body temperatures above 104°F are common in heat stroke. II. BLS TREATMENT COOLING MEASURES Move patient to a cool environment and provide shade when possible, removing constricted or tight clothing including shoes and socks. OXYGEN As appropriate, goal to maintain SpO2 at least 94%, assist ventilations as necessary. VITALS Assess vital signs. TEMPERATURE Assess temperature. BLOOD SUGAR Test glucose and treat as appropriate. CHECK HEAT EXHAUSTION Fluid replacement with water or non-caffeinated sports drink if patient is conscious and able to swallow without difficulty. HEAT STROKE Splash or sponge patient with water. Place cool packs on neck, axillary and COOLING MEASURES groin areas. Promote cooling by fanning (evaporation methods). Subject: ADULT TREATMENT PROTOCOLS - HYPERTHERMIA Policy Number 732 Page 2 of 2 STRIVING FOR EXCELLENCE III. ALS TREATMENT MONITOR Treat rhythm as appropriate. IV/IO ACCESS Rate as appropriate. If the patient has a SBP less than 90 mmHg administer 500 ml fluid boluses to a SBP greater than 90 mmHg. Reassess patient after each bolus. MIDAZOLAM Administer 2 mg IV/IO push. Titrate in 1 mg increments for seizure control, max dose 5 mg IV/IO. Administer 5 mg IN/IM if no immediate IV/IO access available. May repeat once after 10 minutes if seizures continue.



---